# 4.9 — Boolean values

> **Source:** https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/boolean-values/
> **Author:** Alex
> **Date:** Alex June 9, 2007, 3:34 pm PDT February 4, 2025

---

In real-life, it’s common to ask or be asked questions that can be answered with “yes” or “no”. “Is an apple a fruit?” Yes. “Do you like asparagus?” No.

Now consider a similar statement that can be answered with a “true” or “false”: “Apples are a fruit”. It’s clearly true. Or how about, “I like asparagus”. Absolutely false (yuck!).

These kinds of sentences that have only two possible outcomes: yes/true, or no/false are so common, that many programming languages include a special type for dealing with them. That type is called a **Boolean** type (note: Boolean is properly capitalized in the English language because it’s named after its inventor, George Boole).

Boolean variables

Boolean variables are variables that can have only two possible values: `true`, and `false`.

To declare a Boolean variable, we use the keyword `bool`.

```cpp
bool b;
```

To initialize or assign a `true` or `false` value to a Boolean variable, we use the keywords `true` and `false`.

```cpp
bool b1 { true };
bool b2 { false };
b1 = false;
bool b3 {}; // default initialize to false
```

Just as the unary minus operator (-) can be used to make an integer negative, the logical NOT operator (!) can be used to flip a Boolean value from `true` to `false`, or `false` to `true`:

```cpp
bool b1 { !true }; // b1 will be initialized with the value false
bool b2 { !false }; // b2 will be initialized with the value true
```

Boolean values are not actually stored in Boolean variables as the words “true” or “false”. Instead, they are stored as integral values: `true` is stored as integer `1`, and `false` is stored as integer `0`. Similarly, when Boolean values are evaluated, they don’t actually evaluate to “true” or “false”. They evaluate to the integers `0` (false) or `1` (true). Because Booleans store integral values, they are considered to be an integral type.

Printing Boolean values

When we print Boolean values, `std::cout` prints `0` for `false`, and `1` for `true`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << true << '\n'; // true evaluates to 1
    std::cout << !true << '\n'; // !true evaluates to 0

    bool b {false};
    std::cout << b << '\n'; // b is false, which evaluates to 0
    std::cout << !b << '\n'; // !b is true, which evaluates to 1
    return 0;
}
```

Outputs:

```cpp
1
0
0
1
```

Use `std::boolalpha` to print `true` or `false`

If you want `std::cout` to print `true` or `false` instead of `0` or `1`, you can output `std::boolalpha`. This doesn’t output anything, but manipulates the way `std::cout` outputs `bool` values.

Here’s an example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << true << '\n';
    std::cout << false << '\n';

    std::cout << std::boolalpha; // print bools as true or false

    std::cout << true << '\n';
    std::cout << false << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

This prints:

```cpp
1
0
true
false
```

You can use `std::noboolalpha` to turn it back off.

Integer to Boolean conversion

When using uniform initialization, you can initialize a variable using integer literals `0` (for `false`) and `1` (for `true`) (but you really should be using `false` and `true` instead). Other integer literals cause compilation errors:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	bool bFalse { 0 }; // okay: initialized to false
	bool bTrue  { 1 }; // okay: initialized to true
	bool bNo    { 2 }; // error: narrowing conversions disallowed

	std::cout << bFalse << bTrue << bNo << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

However, in any context where an integer can be converted to a Boolean, the integer `0` is converted to `false`, and any other integer is converted to `true`.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	std::cout << std::boolalpha; // print bools as true or false

	bool b1 = 4 ; // copy initialization allows implicit conversion from int to bool
	std::cout << b1 << '\n';

	bool b2 = 0 ; // copy initialization allows implicit conversion from int to bool
	std::cout << b2 << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

This prints:

```cpp
true
false
```

Note: `bool b1 = 4;` may generate a warning. If so you’ll have to disable treating warnings as errors to compile the example.

Inputting Boolean values

Inputting Boolean values using `std::cin` sometimes trips new programmers up.

Consider the following program:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	bool b{}; // default initialize to false
	std::cout << "Enter a boolean value: ";
	std::cin >> b;
	std::cout << "You entered: " << b << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

```cpp
Enter a Boolean value: true
You entered: 0
```

Wait, what?

By default, `std::cin` only accepts numeric input for Boolean variables: `0` is `false`, and `1` is `true`. Any other numeric value will be interpreted as `true`, and will cause `std::cin` to enter failure mode. Any non-numeric value will be interpreted as `false` and will cause `std::cin` to enter failure mode.

Related content

We discuss failure mode (and how to get out of it) in lesson [9.5 -- std::cin and handling invalid input](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/stdcin-and-handling-invalid-input/).

In this case, because we entered `true`, `std::cin` silently failed and set `b` to `false`. Consequently, when `std::cout` prints a value for `b`, it prints `0`.

To allow `std::cin` to accept the words `false` and `true` as inputs, you must first input to `std::boolalpha`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
	bool b{};
	std::cout << "Enter a boolean value: ";

	// Allow the user to input 'true' or 'false' for boolean values
	// This is case-sensitive, so True or TRUE will not work
	std::cin >> std::boolalpha;
	std::cin >> b;

	// Let's also output bool values as `true` or `false`
	std::cout << std::boolalpha;
	std::cout << "You entered: " << b << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

However, when `std::boolalpha` is enabled for input, numeric values will no longer be accepted (they evaluate to `false` and cause std::cin to enter failure mode).

Warning

Enabling `std::boolalpha` for input will only allow lower-cased `false` or `true` to be accepted. Variations with capital letters will not be accepted. `0` and `1` will also no longer be accepted.

Note that we use `std::cin >> std::boolalpha;` to input bool values as `true` or `false`, and `std::cout << std::boolalpha;` to output bool values as `true` or `false`. These are independent controls that can be turned on (using `std::boolalpha`) or off (using `std::noboolalpha`) separately.

Boolean return values

Boolean values are often used as the return values for functions that check whether something is true or not. Such functions are typically named starting with the word *is* (e.g. isEqual) or *has* (e.g. hasCommonDivisor).

Consider the following example, which is quite similar to the above:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

// returns true if x and y are equal, false otherwise
bool isEqual(int x, int y)
{
    return x == y; // operator== returns true if x equals y, and false otherwise
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter an integer: ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    std::cout << "Enter another integer: ";
    int y{};
    std::cin >> y;

    std::cout << std::boolalpha; // print bools as true or false

    std::cout << x << " and " << y << " are equal? ";
    std::cout << isEqual(x, y) << '\n'; // will return true or false

    return 0;
}
```

Here’s output from two runs of this program:

```cpp
Enter an integer: 5
Enter another integer: 5
5 and 5 are equal? true
```

```cpp
Enter an integer: 6
Enter another integer: 4
6 and 4 are equal? false
```

How does this work? First we read in integer values for `x` and `y`. Next, the expression `isEqual(x, y)` is evaluated. In the first run, this results in a function call to `isEqual(5, 5)`. Inside that function, `5 == 5` is evaluated, producing the value `true`. The value `true` is returned back to the caller to be printed by `std::cout`. In the second run, the call to `isEqual(6, 4)` returns the value `false`.

Boolean values take a little bit of getting used to, but once you get your mind wrapped around them, they’re quite refreshing in their simplicity! Boolean values are also a huge part of the language -- you’ll end up using them more than all the other fundamental types put together!

We’ll continue our exploration of Boolean values in the next lesson.
