# 5.x — Chapter 5 summary and quiz

> **Source:** https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/chapter-5-summary-and-quiz/
> **Author:** Alex
> **Date:** Alex October 23, 2023, 1:50 pm PDT December 2, 2024

---

Chapter Review

A **constant** is a value that may not be changed during the program’s execution. C++ supports two types of constants: named constants, and literals.

A **named constant** is a constant value that is associated with an identifier. A **Literal constant** is a constant value not associated with an identifier.

A variable whose value can not be changed is called a **constant variable**. The **const** keyword can be used to make a variable constant. Constant variables must be initialized. Avoid using `const` when passing by value or returning by value.

A **type qualifier** is a keyword that is applied to a type that modifies how that type behaves. As of C++23, C++ only supports `const` and `volatile` as type qualifiers.

A **constant expression** is an expression that can be evaluated at compile-time. An expression that is not a constant expression is sometimes called a **runtime expression**.

A **compile-time constant** is a constant whose value is known at compile-time. A **runtime constant** is a constant whose initialization value isn’t known until runtime.

A **constexpr** variable must be a compile-time constant, and initialized with a constant expression. Function parameters cannot be constexpr.

**Literals** are values inserted directly into the code. Literals have types, and literal suffixes can be used to change the type of a literal from the default type.

A **magic number** is a literal (usually a number) that either has an unclear meaning or may need to be changed later. Don’t use magic numbers in your code. Instead, use symbolic constants.

In everyday life, we count using **decimal** numbers, which have 10 digits. Computers use **binary**, which only has 2 digits. C++ also supports **octal** (base 8) and **hexadecimal** (base 16). These are all examples of **numeral systems**, which are collections of symbols (digits) used to represent numbers.

A **string** is a collection of sequential characters that is used to represent text (such as names, words, and sentences). String literals are always placed between double quotes. String literals in C++ are C-style strings, which have a strange type that is hard to work with.

**std::string** offers an easy and safe way to deal with text strings. std::string lives in the <string> header. `std::string` is expensive to initialize (or assign to) and copy.

**std::string\_view** provides read-only access to an existing string (a C-style string literal, a std::string, or a char array) without making a copy. A `std::string_view` that is viewing a string that has been destroyed is sometimes called a **dangling** view. When a `std::string` is modified, all views into that `std::string` are **invalidated**, meaning those views are now invalid. Using an invalidated view (other than to revalidate it) will produce undefined behavior.

Because C-style string literals exist for the entire program, it is okay to set a `std::string_view` to a C-style string literal, and even return such a `std::string_view` from a function.

A **substring** is a contiguous sequence of characters within an existing string.

Quiz time

Question #1

Why are named constants often a better choice than literal constants?

Using literal constants (a.k.a. magic numbers) in your program makes your program harder to understand and harder to modify. Symbolic constants help document what the numbers actually represent, and changing a symbolic constant at its declaration changes the value everywhere it is used.

Why are const/constexpr variables usually a better choice than #defined symbolic constants?

#define constants do not show up in the debugger and are more likely to have naming conflicts.

Question #2

Find 3 issues in the following code:

```cpp
#include <cstdint> // for std::uint8_t
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
  std::cout << "How old are you?\n";

  std::uint8_t age{};
  std::cin >> age;

  std::cout << "Allowed to drive a car in Texas: ";

  if (age >= 16)
      std::cout << "Yes";
  else
      std::cout << "No";

  std::cout << '.\n';

  return 0;
}
```

Sample desired output:

```cpp
How old are you?
6
Allowed to drive a car in Texas: No
```

```cpp
How old are you?
19
Allowed to drive a car in Texas: Yes
```

1. On line 8, `age` is defined as a `std::uint8_t`. Because `std::uint8_t` is typically defined as a char type, using it here will cause the program to behave as if we’re inputting and outputting a char value rather than a numeric value. For example, if the user entered their age as “18”, only the character `'1'` would be extracted. Because `1` has ASCII value `49`, the user would be treated as if they were 49 years old. A regular `int` should be used to store the age, as the age doesn’t require a specific minimum integer width. We can also remove `#include <cstdint>`.
2. On line 13, we use the magic number `16`. Although the meaning of `16` is clear from the context it is used in, using a `constexpr` variable with the value `16` should be preferred instead.
3. On line 18, `'.\n'` is a multicharacter literal that will print the wrong value. It should be double-quoted (`".\n"`).

- On line 8, `age` is defined as a `std::uint8_t`. Because `std::uint8_t` is typically defined as a char type, using it here will cause the program to behave as if we’re inputting and outputting a char value rather than a numeric value. For example, if the user entered their age as “18”, only the character `'1'` would be extracted. Because `1` has ASCII value `49`, the user would be treated as if they were 49 years old. A regular `int` should be used to store the age, as the age doesn’t require a specific minimum integer width. We can also remove `#include <cstdint>`.
`#include <cstdint>`- On line 13, we use the magic number `16`. Although the meaning of `16` is clear from the context it is used in, using a `constexpr` variable with the value `16` should be preferred instead.
`16`- On line 18, `'.\n'` is a multicharacter literal that will print the wrong value. It should be double-quoted (`".\n"`).

Question #3

What are the primary differences between `std::string` and `std::string_view`?

What can go wrong when using a `std::string_view`?

`std::string` provides a modifiable string. It is expensive to initialize and copy.

`std::string_view` provide a read-only view of a string that exists elsewhere. It is inexpensive to initialize and copy. `std::string_view` can be dangerous when the string being viewed is destroyed before the `std::string_view` that is viewing it.

Question #4

Write a program that asks for the name and age of two people, then prints which person is older.

Here is the sample output from one run of the program:

```cpp
Enter the name of person #1: John Bacon
Enter the age of John Bacon: 37
Enter the name of person #2: David Jenkins
Enter the age of David Jenkins: 44
David Jenkins (age 44) is older than John Bacon (age 37).
```

Hint: Input the person’s name using `std::getline()`

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <string_view>

std::string getName(int num)
{
    std::cout << "Enter the name of person #" << num << ": ";
    std::string name{};
    std::getline(std::cin >> std::ws, name); // read a full line of text into name

    return name;
}

int getAge(std::string_view sv)
{
    std::cout << "Enter the age of " << sv << ": ";
    int age{};
    std::cin >> age;

    return age;
}

void printOlder(std::string_view name1, int age1, std::string_view name2, int age2)
{
    if (age1 > age2)
        std::cout << name1 << " (age " << age1 <<") is older than " << name2 << " (age " << age2 <<").\n";
    else
        std::cout << name2 << " (age " << age2 <<") is older than " << name1 << " (age " << age1 <<").\n";
}

int main()
{
    const std::string name1{ getName(1) };
    const int age1 { getAge(name1) };

    const std::string name2{ getName(2) };
    const int age2 { getAge(name2) };

    printOlder(name1, age1, name2, age2);

    return 0;
}
```

Question #5

In the solution to the above quiz, why can’t variable `age1` in `main` be constexpr?

A constexpr variable requires a constant expression initializer, and the call to `getAge()` isn’t allowed in a constant expression. Therefore, we can only make the variable const.
