# 7.9 — Inline functions and variables

> **Source:** https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/inline-functions-and-variables/
> **Author:** Alex
> **Date:** Alex July 30, 2007, 3:16 pm PDT January 18, 2025

---

Consider the case where you need to write some code to perform some discrete task, like reading input from the user, or outputting something to a file, or calculating a particular value. When implementing this code, you essentially have two options:

1. Write the code as part of an existing function (called writing code “in-place” or “inline”).
2. Create a new function (and possibly sub-functions) to handle the task.

- Write the code as part of an existing function (called writing code “in-place” or “inline”).
- Create a new function (and possibly sub-functions) to handle the task.

Putting the code in a new function provides many potential benefits, as small functions:

- Are easier to read and understand in the context of the overall program.
- Are easier to reuse, as functions are naturally modular.
- Are easier to update, as the code only needs to be modified in one place.

However, one downside of using a new function is that every time a function is called, there is a certain amount of performance overhead that occurs. Consider the following example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int min(int x, int y)
{
    return (x < y) ? x : y;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << min(5, 6) << '\n';
    std::cout << min(3, 2) << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

When a call to `min()` is encountered, the CPU must store the address of the current instruction it is executing (so it knows where to return to later) along with the values of various CPU registers (so they can be restored upon returning). Then parameters `x` and `y` must be instantiated and then initialized. Then the execution path has to jump to the code in the `min()` function. When the function ends, the program has to jump back to the location of the function call, and the return value has to be copied so it can be output. This has to be done for each function call.
All of the extra work that must happen to setup, facilitate, and/or cleanup after some task (in this case, making a function call) is called **overhead**.

For functions that are large and/or perform complex tasks, the overhead of the function call is typically insignificant compared to the amount of time the function takes to run. However, for small functions (such as `min()` above), the overhead costs can be larger than the time needed to actually execute the function’s code! In cases where a small function is called often, using a function can result in a significant performance penalty over writing the same code in-place.

Inline expansion

Fortunately, the C++ compiler has a trick that it can use to avoid such overhead cost: **Inline expansion** is a process where a function call is replaced by the code from the called function’s definition.

For example, if the compiler expanded the `min()` calls in the above example, the resulting code would look like this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << ((5 < 6) ? 5 : 6) << '\n';
    std::cout << ((3 < 2) ? 3 : 2) << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

Note that the two calls to function `min()` have been replaced by the code in the body of the `min()` function (with the value of the arguments substituted for the parameters). This allows us to avoid the overhead of those calls, while preserving the results of the code.

The performance of inline code

Beyond removing the cost of function call, inline expansion can also allow the compiler to optimize the resulting code more efficiently -- for example, because the expression `((5 < 6) ? 5 : 6)` is now a constant expression, the compiler could further optimize the first statement in `main()` to `std::cout << 5 << '\n';`.

However, inline expansion has its own potential cost: if the body of the function being expanded takes more instructions than the function call being replaced, then each inline expansion will cause the executable to grow larger. Larger executables tend to be slower (due to not fitting as well in memory caches).

The decision about whether a function would benefit from being made inline (because removal of the function call overhead outweighs the cost of a larger executable) is not straightforward. Inline expansion could result in performance improvements, performance reductions, or no change to performance at all, depending on the relative cost of a function call, the size of the function, and what other optimizations can be performed.

Inline expansion is best suited to simple, short functions (e.g. no more than a few statements), especially cases where a single function call can be executed more than once (e.g. function calls inside a loop).

When inline expansion occurs

Every function falls into one of two categories, where calls to the function:

- May be expanded (most functions are in this category).
- Can’t be expanded.

Most functions fall into the “may” category: their function calls can be expanded if and when it is beneficial to do so. For functions in this category, a modern compiler will assess each function and each function call to make a determination about whether that particular function call would benefit from inline expansion. A compiler might decide to expand none, some, or all of the function calls to a given function.

Tip

Modern optimizing compilers make the decision about when functions should be expanded inline.

The most common kind of function that can’t be expanded inline is a function whose definition is in another translation unit. Since the compiler can’t see the definition for such a function, it doesn’t know what to replace the function call with!

The inline keyword, historically

Historically, compilers either didn’t have the capability to determine whether inline expansion would be beneficial, or were not very good at it. For this reason, C++ provided the keyword `inline`, which was originally intended to be used as a hint to the compiler that a function would (probably) benefit from being expanded inline.

A function that is declared using the `inline` keyword is called an **inline function**.

Here’s an example of using the `inline` keyword:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

inline int min(int x, int y) // inline keyword means this function is an inline function
{
    return (x < y) ? x : y;
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << min(5, 6) << '\n';
    std::cout << min(3, 2) << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

However, in modern C++, the `inline` keyword is no longer used to request that a function be expanded inline. There are quite a few reasons for this:

- Using `inline` to request inline expansion is a form of premature optimization, and misuse could actually harm performance.
- The `inline` keyword is just a hint to help the compiler determine where to perform inline expansion. The compiler is completely free to ignore the request, and it may very well do so. The compiler is also free to perform inline expansion of functions that do not use the `inline` keyword as part of its normal set of optimizations.
- The `inline` keyword is defined at the wrong level of granularity. We use the `inline` keyword on a function definition, but inline expansion is actually determined per function call. It may be beneficial to expand some function calls and detrimental to expand others, and there is no syntax to influence this.

- Using `inline` to request inline expansion is a form of premature optimization, and misuse could actually harm performance.
`inline`- The `inline` keyword is just a hint to help the compiler determine where to perform inline expansion. The compiler is completely free to ignore the request, and it may very well do so. The compiler is also free to perform inline expansion of functions that do not use the `inline` keyword as part of its normal set of optimizations.
`inline`- The `inline` keyword is defined at the wrong level of granularity. We use the `inline` keyword on a function definition, but inline expansion is actually determined per function call. It may be beneficial to expand some function calls and detrimental to expand others, and there is no syntax to influence this.

Modern optimizing compilers are typically good at determining which function calls should be made inline -- better than humans in most cases. As a result, the compiler will likely ignore or devalue any use of `inline` to request inline expansion for your functions.

Best practice

Do not use the `inline` keyword to request inline expansion for your functions.

The inline keyword, modernly

In previous chapters, we mentioned that you should not implement functions (with external linkage) in header files, because when those headers are included into multiple .cpp files, the function definition will be copied into multiple .cpp files. These files will then be compiled, and the linker will throw an error because it will note that you’ve defined the same function more than once, which is a violation of the one-definition rule.

In modern C++, the term `inline` has evolved to mean “multiple definitions are allowed”. Thus, an inline function is one that is allowed to be defined in multiple translation units (without violating the ODR).

Inline functions have two primary requirements:

- The compiler needs to be able to see the full definition of an inline function in each translation unit where the function is used (a forward declaration will not suffice on its own). Only one such definition can occur per translation unit, otherwise a compilation error will occur.
- The definition can occur after the point of use if a forward declaration is also provided. However, the compiler will likely not be able to perform inline expansion until it has seen the definition (so any uses between the declaration and definition will probably not be candidates for inline expansion).
- Every definition for an inline function (with external linkage, which functions have by default) must be identical, otherwise undefined behavior will result.

Rule

The compiler needs to be able to see the full definition of an inline function wherever it is used, and all definitions for an inline function (with external linkage) must be identical (or undefined behavior will result).

Related content

We cover internal linkage in lesson [7.6 -- Internal linkage](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/internal-linkage/) and external linkage in lesson [7.7 -- External linkage and variable forward declarations](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/external-linkage-and-variable-forward-declarations/).

The linker will consolidate all inline function definitions for an identifier into a single definition (thus still meeting the requirements of the one definition rule).

Here’s an example:

main.cpp:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

double circumference(double radius); // forward declaration

inline double pi() { return 3.14159; }

int main()
{
    std::cout << pi() << '\n';
    std::cout << circumference(2.0) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

math.cpp

```cpp
inline double pi() { return 3.14159; }

double circumference(double radius)
{
    return 2.0 * pi() * radius;
}
```

Notice that both files have a definition for function `pi()` -- however, because this function has been marked as `inline`, this is acceptable, and the linker will de-duplicate them. If you remove the `inline` keyword from both definitions of `pi()`, you’ll get an ODR violation (as duplicate definitions for non-inline functions are disallowed).

Optional reading

While the historic use of inline (to perform inline expansion) and the modern use of inline (to allow multiple definitions) may seem a bit unrelated, they are highly interconnected.

Historically, let’s say we had some trivial function that is a great candidate for inline expansion, so we mark it as `inline`. In order to actually perform inline expansion of a function call, the compiler must be able to see the full definition of this function in each translation unit where the function is used -- otherwise it wouldn’t know what to replace each function call with. A function defined in another translation unit can’t be inline expanded in the current translation unit being compiled.

It’s common for trivial inline functions to be needed in multiple translation units. But as soon as we copy the function definition into each translation unit (per the prior requirement), this ends up violating the ODR’s requirement that a function only have a single definition per program. The best solution to this issue was simply to make inline functions exempt from the ODR requirement that there only be a single definition per program.

So historically, we used `inline` to request inline expansion, and the ODR-exemption was a detail that was required to make such functions inline expandable across multiple translation units. Modernly, we use `inline` for the ODR-exemption, and let the compiler handle the inline expansion stuff. The mechanics of how inline functions work hasn’t changed, our focus has.

You might be wondering why inline functions were allowed to be ODR-exempt but non-inline functions still must adhere to this part of the ODR. With non-inline functions, we expect a function to be defined exactly once (in a single translation unit). If the linker runs across multiple definitions of a non-inline function, it assumes this is due to a naming conflict between two independently defined functions. And any call to a non-inline function with more than one definition would lead to potential ambiguity about which definition is the correct one to call. But with inline functions, all definitions are assumed to be for the same inline function, so the function calls within that translation unit can be expanded inline. And if a function call isn’t expanded inline, there is no ambiguity about which of multiple definitions is the correct one for the call to match with -- any of them are fine!

Inline functions are typically defined in header files, where they can be #included into the top of any code file that needs to see the full definition of the identifier. This ensures that all inline definitions for an identifier are identical.

pi.h:

```cpp
#ifndef PI_H
#define PI_H

inline double pi() { return 3.14159; }

#endif
```

main.cpp:

```cpp
#include "pi.h" // will include a copy of pi() here
#include <iostream>

double circumference(double radius); // forward declaration

int main()
{
    std::cout << pi() << '\n';
    std::cout << circumference(2.0) << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

math.cpp

```cpp
#include "pi.h" // will include a copy of pi() here

double circumference(double radius)
{
    return 2.0 * pi() * radius;
}
```

This is particularly useful for **header-only libraries**, which are one or more header files that implement some capability (no .cpp files are included). Header-only libraries are popular because there are no source files that need to be added to a project to use them and nothing that needs to be linked. You simply #include the header-only library and then can use it.

Related content

We show a practical example where inline is used for a random number generation header-only library in lesson [8.15 -- Global random numbers (Random.h)](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/global-random-numbers-random-h/).

For advanced readers

The following functions are implicitly inline:

- Functions defined inside a class, struct, or union type definition ([14.3 -- Member functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/member-functions/)).
- Constexpr / consteval functions ([F.1 -- Constexpr functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/constexpr-functions/)).
- Functions implicitly instantiated from function templates ([11.7 -- Function template instantiation](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/function-template-instantiation/)).

- Functions defined inside a class, struct, or union type definition ([14.3 -- Member functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/member-functions/)).
[14.3 -- Member functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/member-functions/)- Constexpr / consteval functions ([F.1 -- Constexpr functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/constexpr-functions/)).
[F.1 -- Constexpr functions](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/constexpr-functions/)- Functions implicitly instantiated from function templates ([11.7 -- Function template instantiation](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/function-template-instantiation/)).

For the most part, you should not mark your functions or variables as inline unless you are defining them in a header file (and they are not already implicitly inline).

Best practice

Avoid the use of the `inline` keyword unless you have a specific, compelling reason to do so (e.g. you’re defining those functions or variables in a header file).

Why not make all functions inline and defined in a header file?

Mainly because doing so can increase your compile times significantly.

When a header containing an inline function is #included into a source file, that function definition will be compiled as part of that translation unit. An inline function #included into 6 translation units will have its definition compiled 6 times (before the linker deduplicates the definitions). Conversely, a function defined in a source file will have its definition compiled only once, no matter how many translation units its forward declaration is included into.

Second, if a function defined in a source file changes, only that single source file needs to be recompiled. When an inline function in a header file changes, every code file that includes that header (either directly or via another header) needs to recompiled. On large projects, this can cause a cascade of recompilation and have a drastic impact.

Inline variables C++17

C++17

In the above example, `pi()` was written as a function that returns a constant value. It would be more staightforward if `pi` were implemented as a (const) variable instead. However, prior to C++17, there were some obstacles and inefficiencies in doing so.

C++17 introduces **inline variables**, which are variables that are allowed to be defined in multiple files. Inline variables work similarly to inline functions, and have the same requirements (the compiler must be able to see an identical full definition everywhere the variable is used).

For advanced readers

The following variables are implicitly inline:

- Static constexpr data members [15.6 -- Static member variables](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/static-member-variables/).

Unlike constexpr functions, constexpr variables are not inline by default (excepting those noted above)!

We’ll illustrate a common use for inline variables in lesson [7.10 -- Sharing global constants across multiple files (using inline variables)](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/sharing-global-constants-across-multiple-files-using-inline-variables/).
