# 8.2 — If statements and blocks

> **Source:** https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/if-statements-and-blocks/
> **Author:** Alex
> **Date:** Alex June 21, 2007, 10:01 am PDT March 5, 2025

---

The first category of control flow statements we’ll talk about is conditional statements. A **conditional statement** is a statement that specifies whether some associated statement(s) should be executed or not.

C++ supports two basic kinds of conditionals: `if statements` (which we introduced in lesson [4.10 -- Introduction to if statements](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/introduction-to-if-statements/), and will talk about further here) and `switch statements` (which we’ll cover in a couple of lessons).

Quick if-statement recap

The most basic kind of conditional statement in C++ is the `if statement`. An `if statement` takes the form:

```cpp
if (condition)
    true_statement;
```

or with an optional `else statement`:

```cpp
if (condition)
    true_statement;
else
    false_statement;
```

If the `condition` evaluates to `true`, the `true_statement` executes. If the `condition` evaluates to `false` and the optional `else statement` exists, the `false_statement` executes.

Here is a simple program that uses an `if statement` with the optional `else statement`:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter a number: ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    if (x > 10)
        std::cout << x << " is greater than 10\n";
    else
        std::cout << x << " is not greater than 10\n";

    return 0;
}
```

This program works just like you’d expect:

```cpp
Enter a number: 15
15 is greater than 10
```

```cpp
Enter a number: 4
4 is not greater than 10
```

If or else with multiple conditional statements

New programmers often try something like this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

namespace constants
{
    constexpr int minRideHeightCM { 140 };
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter your height (in cm): ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    if (x >= constants::minRideHeightCM)
        std::cout << "You are tall enough to ride.\n";
    else
        std::cout << "You are not tall enough to ride.\n";
        std::cout << "Too bad!\n"; // focus on this line

    return 0;
}
```

However, consider the following run of the program:

```cpp
Enter your height (in cm): 180
You are tall enough to ride.
Too bad!
```

This program doesn’t work as expected because the `true_statement` and `false_statement` can only be a single statement. The indentation is deceiving us here -- the above program executes as if it had been written as follows:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

namespace constants
{
    constexpr int minRideHeightCM { 140 };
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter your height (in cm): ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    if (x >= constants::minRideHeightCM)
        std::cout << "You are tall enough to ride.\n";
    else
        std::cout << "You are not tall enough to ride.\n";

    std::cout << "Too bad!\n"; // focus on this line

    return 0;
}
```

This makes it clearer that “Too bad!” will always execute.

However, it’s common to want to execute multiple statements based on some condition. To do so, we can use a compound statement (block):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

namespace constants
{
    constexpr int minRideHeightCM { 140 };
}

int main()
{
    std::cout << "Enter your height (in cm): ";
    int x{};
    std::cin >> x;

    if (x >= constants::minRideHeightCM)
        std::cout << "You are tall enough to ride.\n";
    else
    { // note addition of block here
        std::cout << "You are not tall enough to ride.\n";
        std::cout << "Too bad!\n";
    }

    return 0;
}
```

Remember that blocks are treated as a single statement, so this now works as expected:

```cpp
Enter your height (in cm): 180
You are tall enough to ride.
```

```cpp
Enter your height (in cm): 130
You are not tall enough to ride.
Too bad!
```

Implicit blocks

If the programmer does not declare a block in the statement portion of an `if statement` or `else statement`, the compiler will implicitly declare one. Thus:

```cpp
if (condition)
    true_statement;
else
    false_statement;
```

is actually the equivalent of:

```cpp
if (condition)
{
    true_statement;
}
else
{
    false_statement;
}
```

Most of the time, this doesn’t matter. However, new programmers sometimes try to define variables in the implicit block, like this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    if (true)
        int x{ 5 };
    else
        int x{ 6 };

    std::cout << x << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

This won’t compile, with the compiler generating an error that identifier `x` isn’t defined. This is because the above example is the equivalent of:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    if (true)
    {
        int x{ 5 };
    } // x destroyed here
    else
    {
        int x{ 6 };
    } // x destroyed here

    std::cout << x << '\n'; // x isn't in scope here

    return 0;
}
```

In this context, it’s clearer that variable `x` has block scope and is destroyed at the end of the block. By the time we get to the `std::cout` line, `x` doesn’t exist.

To block or not to block single statements

There is debate within the programmer community as to whether single statements following an `if` or `else` should be explicitly enclosed in blocks or not.

There are many reasons given as rationale for using blocks.

1. Not using blocks makes it easier to inadvertently add statements that look like they are conditional but aren’t. Consider:

```cpp
if (age >= minDrinkingAge)
    purchaseBeer();
```

Now let’s say we’re in a hurry and modify this program to add another ability:

```cpp
if (age >= minDrinkingAge)
    purchaseBeer();
    gamble(); // will always execute
```

Oops, we’ve just allowed minors to gamble. Have fun in jail!

2. Not using blocks can make programs more difficult to debug. Let’s say we have the following snippet:

```cpp
if (age >= minDrinkingAge)
    addBeerToCart(); // conditionally executes

checkout(); // always executes
```

Let’s say we suspect something is wrong with the `addBeerToCart()` function, so we comment it out:

```cpp
if (age >= minDrinkingAge)
//    addBeerToCart();

checkout(); // conditionally executes now
```

Now we’ve made `checkout()` conditional, which we certainly didn’t intend.

Neither of the above occur if you always use blocks after an `if` or `else`.

3. `if constexpr` (a variant of the if-statement added in C++23) requires the use of blocks. Thus using blocks ensures consistency between `if` and `if constexpr`.

The best argument for not using blocks around single statements is that adding blocks makes you able to see less of your code at one time by spacing it out vertically, which makes your code less readable and can lead to other, more serious mistakes.

The community seems to be more in favor of always using blocks than not, though this recommendation certainly isn’t ubiquitous.

Best practice

Consider putting single statements associated with an `if` or `else` in blocks (particularly while you are learning). More experienced C++ developers sometimes disregard this practice in favor of tighter vertical spacing.

A reasonable middle-ground alternative is to put single-lines on the same line as the `if` or `else`:

```cpp
if (age >= minDrinkingAge) purchaseBeer();
else std::cout << "No drinky for you\n".
```

This avoids both of the above downsides mentioned above at some minor cost to readability.

One fair criticism of the single-line method is that it produces code that is harder to debug:

- Because the conditional and associated statement will execute as part of the same step, it is more difficult to tell whether the statement actually executed or was skipped.
- Because the conditional and associated statement are on the same line, you can’t breakpoint just the associated statement (to stop execution only when the statement actually executes).

However, if either of the above points are hindering when debugging, you can insert a newline between the conditional and the statement (so they are on separate lines), do your debugging, then remove the newline afterward.

If-else vs if-if

New programmers sometimes wonder when they should use if-else (if followed by one or more else-statements) or if-if (if followed by one or more additional if-statements).

- Use if-else when you only want to execute the code after the first `true` condition.
- Use if-if when you want to execute the code after all `true` conditions.

- Use if-else when you only want to execute the code after the first `true` condition.
`true`- Use if-if when you want to execute the code after all `true` conditions.

Here’s a program that demonstrates this:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void ifelse(bool a, bool b, bool c)
{
    if (a)      // always evaluates
        std::cout << "a";
    else if (b) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        std::cout << "b";
    else if (c) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        std::cout << "c";
    std::cout << '\n';
}

void ifif(bool a, bool b, bool c)
{
    if (a) // always evaluates
        std::cout << "a";
    if (b) // always evaluates
        std::cout << "b";
    if (c) // always evaluates
        std::cout << "c";
    std::cout << '\n';
}

int main()
{
    ifelse(false, true, true);
    ifif(false, true, true);

    return 0;
}
```

In the call to `ifelse(false, true, true)`, `a` is `false`, so we do not execute the associated statement, and the associated `else` is executed instead. `b` is true, so we print `b`. Since this `if` condition was true, the associated `else` will not execute (and neither would any other `else` statements immediately following that one). Note that we only executed the code immediately after the first `true` condition (`b`).

In the call to `ifif(false, true, true)`, `a` is false, so we do not execute the associated statement, and move to the next `if`. `b` is true, so we print `b` and move to the next `if`. `c` is true, so we print `c`. Note that we executed the code after all `true` conditions (`b` and `c`).

Now look at this somewhat similar function:

```cpp
char getFirstMatchingChar(bool a, bool b, bool c)
{
    if (a) // always evaluates
        return 'a';
    else if (b) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        return 'b';
    else if (c) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        return 'c';

    return 0;
}
```

Since we’re using if-else, it’s clear we only want to execute the code after the first `true` condition. But when every associated statement returns a value, we can write this instead:

```cpp
char getFirstMatchingChar(bool a, bool b, bool c)
{
    if (a) // always evaluates
        return 'a'; // returns when if-statement is true
    if (b) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        return 'b'; // returns when if-statement is true
    if (c) // only evaluates when prior if-statement condition is false
        return 'c'; // returns when if-statement is true

    return 0;
}
```

While this might superficially look like we want to execute the code after every `true` condition, as soon as we find the first `true` condition, the associated statement will cause the function to return. The remaining if-statements never have a chance to evaluate. Therefore, this behaves equivalently to the prior version. When every associated statement returns a value, many programmers prefer to omit the `else` keywords, as doing so avoids unnecessary clutter and the conditions line up better.

Key insight

When all associated statements return a value, you can always just use if-if since `else` provides no value.

We’ll continue our exploration of if-statements in the next lesson.
